Each week we cut through the noise to bring you smart, practical recommendations on how to live better – from what is worth buying to the tools, habits and ideas that actually last.

The Guardian’s journalism is independent. We will earn a commission if you buy something through an affiliate link. Learn more.

I’ve always envied people who can enjoy a good nap. I feel a stab of jealousy whenever my mom speaks about the benefits of her weekly Saturday rest, which she swears leaves her feeling more energized than ever.

Meanwhile, whenever I’ve tried, I either can’t fall asleep or wake up feeling more tired than before. Filter US contributor Juno DeMelo was the same, until she discovered this affordable sleep mask that she praised in a recent piece for helping her enjoy a midday rest.

Napping’s many benefits inspired me to consult experts for their advice on taking a great one. I asked a sleep psychologist, Dr Jade Wu, and a former emergency medicine doctor who napped before night shifts and on breaks, Sarah Nicholls, to bestow their wisdom upon us.

Nicholls got so good at napping that she once slept in an empty patient waiting room at 3am. “The seats were super uncomfortable,” she said.

Below are four strategies for becoming a better napper – including a surprising tidbit that caused me to rethink my definition of napping altogether.

Read the full story: This $30 sleep mask helps me nap anytime, anywhere

A good nap doesn’t have to involve sleep

To my surprise, you don’t have to actually fall asleep to reap the benefits of a nap.

“As long as your brain is resting in a quiet space, with your eyes closed, without distractions and without doing something goal-oriented in your mind, your brain activity will slow down and get into a pattern similar to what it’s like during napping,” said Wu.

Don’t underestimate a sleep accessory

During her time working the night shift, Nicholls found that a few items were especially helpful.

A “completely dark, cool and quiet environment” helped her nap before a shift. “Blackout blinds are hugely helpful for this,” she said.

Like DeMelo, Nicholls is also a champion of a good sleep mask, and personally uses this inexpensive one from Gritin.

Gritin Sleep Mask

She also recommended earplugs for blocking out noise – “Standard foam ones are fine,” she said, “but if you really want to block out all noise, try the silicone ones.” Over at the Filter, we’ve recommended a few of our own favorites, including this pair from Loop that stay put for flights and restless nights of sleep.

Loop Dream Earplugs

Breathwork is your friend

If you’re strapped for time, Nicholls advised trying breathwork, which is more than just the latest wellness trend.

“For a quick 30-minute window, focus on relaxation techniques immediately. My favorite is box breathing,” she said. That’s the technique where you breathe in for a count of four, hold for four and then exhale for four.

If you’re new to breathwork, we tested the best meditation apps to help you get started.

Timing matters

Wu suggested capping your naps at 30 minutes to avoid that dreaded groggy feeling.

Wu also cautioned against switching up the time of day and length that you nap: “This disrupts your night-time sleep and destabilizes your circadian rhythms, making your sleep quality worse and increasing your risk for sleep problems like insomnia,” she said.

Read our sleep coverage:

Buy it for life: Davek Solo umbrella

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Jon Chan/The Guardian

I never thought I’d be so happy to see rain on my weather app’s forecast. But after New York City’s brutal winter weather, I’m ready for anything to make those filthy snowbanks disappear.

Rainy days require a good umbrella, and we recently recommended the Davek Solo, which has earned our coveted “buy it for life” designation for both its portability and durability. It even lasted through a nor’easter.

Davek Solo Umbrella

Read the full story: Embrace the rain with a go-anywhere umbrella built to last

Winter apparel: men’s jackets

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Courtesy of: Shackleton; BSTN

With only 30 days left until spring (but who’s counting?), you might never want to think about winter coats again, but now is a surprisingly good time to buy a durable new one – especially with the influx of end-of-season sales.

To find the ones worth a spot in your coat closet, we asked people who spend most of their day working outside for their holy grails. From a meteorologist-approved hooded jacket to an eco-friendly puffer, our roundup will get you through the last dregs of winter.

Marc Men’s Holden Hooded Parka

Shackleton Hercules Ultralight Down Jacket

Read our guide: The 8 best winter jackets for men to buy for life, vetted by pros who work in the cold

Kitchen upgrade: milk frothers

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Michael Berk/The Guardian

I talked to you about the importance of sleep above, but that doesn’t mean we’ve forgotten the other 16 hours in the day.

And this week, we rounded up my all-time favorite coffee accessory – the milk frother – that will have you jumping out of bed to make your morning cup. From wands to whisks, we tested different models’ frothing capabilities against a variety of milks – including oat, almond and whole.

Surprisingly, this under-$20 option was one of the favorites that we tried, and even doubles as a multitasking kitchen whisk.

Aerolatte

Read the full story: The best milk frothers in the US for everything from lattes to hot chocolate

Cold weather corner: women’s winter boots

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Evgeniia Siiankovskaia/Getty Images

Much to my mother’s dismay, I don’t own a pair of snow boots. That meant that after New York City’s recent snowstorm, I attempted to navigate its slippery streets in Birkenstock clogs (I do not recommend).

If you’re also in the market for a new pair of snow boots or are prepping for next winter, we asked outdoorsy people to recommend their favorites.

I’m personally eyeing these hiking boots recommended by a former National Geographic Adventurer of the Year.

Merrell Thermo Chill 2 Mid Waterproof Boots

Read our recommendations: The 9 best winter boots for women to buy for life, vetted by pros who work outdoors