So-called non-toxic pans are often under a microscope. If you go down an internet rabbit hole about “toxic cookware,” you’ll find scary phrases about heavy metals, chemical coatings and something called polymer flume fever. It’s enough to make you side-eye the skillet you use every morning.

The Guardian’s journalism is independent. We will earn a commission if you buy something through an affiliate link. Learn more.

What’s actually going on? At the Drexel Food Lab, we investigate questions like these. When we started our search for the best non-toxic pans, we immediately reached out to our best colleague for defining toxicity: Dr Caroline Schauer, head of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University.

“In chemistry and health contexts, a material is considered toxic [to people] if it can cause damage to organs or increase the risk of disease,” she said. Nonstick coatings are typically fine on their own, but they can release chemicals at high heat. Some of those are Pfas, PFOA, BPA and PTFE, otherwise known as “forever chemicals” that have been linked to health problems. When these coatings are heated to temperatures higher than 650F (343C), they can also release fumes that, if inhaled, can cause flu-like symptoms.

The good news is that cookware brands have responded. Many brands test for these chemicals, or use materials that limit chemical exposure while staying nonstick and cooking well.

At the Drexel Food Lab, we tested 13 of the top non-toxic pans in the US to learn which cook the best, including buzzy brands Our Place and Caraway. We also asked Schauer to explain what “forever chemicals” really are, and what the safest cookware materials are. Scroll past our list for her advice.

At a glance

Best overall:

Our Place Titanium Always Pan Pro

Best budget:

Lodge Cast Iron

Best heat retention:

Victoria 12in Cast Iron Skillet

Best for the oven:

Caraway Enamel Cast Iron Skillet

Best splurge:

Smithey Ironware 12in Carbon Steel Farmhouse Skillet

Best cast-iron cleaner:

Field Company Cast Iron Care Kit



Why you should trust us

Based at Drexel University in Philadelphia, the Drexel Food Lab is a food product design and innovation lab that uses cooking and food science to help improve health, reduce waste and build smarter food systems. On any given day, we might be developing a new product, helping businesses cut down on food waste, exploring culinary medicine or running consumer research and taste tests.

We’re staffed by students and mentored by faculty. Right now, our team includes one faculty lead, two administrative staff members and 13 students from backgrounds ranging across culinary arts, nutrition, sensory science, public health and more.

Working in commercial kitchens, we require pans that can hold up to industrial dishwashers, the high flames of a gas range and of course, the inevitable plummet to the floor.

How we tested non-toxic pans

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Rachel Sherman/The Guardian

While choosing pans, we avoided any materials with Pfas, PFOA, BPA and PTFEs. Pfas refers to a broad family of synthetic chemicals, and PFOA is one of them. BPA and PTFE are used for plastics.

We ended up with 13 pans across seven brands with these non-toxic materials: stainless steel, carbon steel, cast iron, enamel cast iron and ceramic.

Over a period of two weeks, we ran a variety of tests: how long a pan took to heat up, how well it retained heat once removed from the source, how sticky eggs got on their surface, how crisply chicken and fish seared in them, and how well they baked cornbread. We also examined how difficult to clean and wash the pans were, along with any discoloration they acquired after tests.

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Rachel Sherman/The Guardian

Heat rate test: Since some of the pans recommended a max heat of 450F and use of low-medium heat, we began with a control pan over medium heat on a gas burner and continued to reduce temperature until around 400F. From there, we tested all pans on the same burner to keep the temperature consistent, and tracked how long each pan’s surface took to get to 400F.

Protein sear test: We cooked a small piece of skin-on salmon for three minutes on each side, using a metal spatula unless the pan’s instructions recommended otherwise. We did the same with chicken.

Heat retention test: We then removed the pan from heat and tested its temperature at removal using an infrared thermometer. We checked the temp again at three and five minutes.

Egg stickiness test: We made all eggs over-medium to test heat consistency, as it is easy to overcook a part of an egg with this method. The nonstick pans were the most forgiving; eggs were harder to remove from cast iron and stainless steel if not cooked at a lower temperature.

As a non-profit, we kept two pans for the lab to replace some of our own equipment and track how they do over time. We donated the rest to Rebel Ventures, a youth-led food non-profit in Philadelphia that the Drexel Food Lab has supported for the past few years.

The best non-toxic pans in 2026

Best overall:

Our Place Titanium Always Pan Pro Our Place Titanium Always Pan Pro from $179 $179 at Our Place $179 at Amazon Photograph: Courtesy of Our Place $179 at Our Place $179 at Amazon The struggle with finding a great non-toxic pan is that many of the pans have coatings that aren’t safe to cook at temperatures beyond 500F. As “the first non-stick without a coating” due to patented tech, as Our Place boasts, the Titanium Always Pan Pro has a max temp of 1,000F. So you won’t have to worry about putting it in a hot oven, on a grill or broiler, or overheating it on the stove if you get distracted. What we loved: This pan rated highly across our tests: it heat up quickly, eggs slid off the pan smoothly, and proteins got an even sear despite the micro-dot ridges on the pan’s surface (that help with the nonstick effect). If you’re looking for a flexible pan that’s easy to use, this is the one. Since the pan heats up so quickly, we recommend starting at medium-low heat until you get a feel for it. But you won’t need to be conscientious about overheating a nonstick coating, and you won’t have to deal with the necessary pan care for a cast-iron or carbon-steel skillet. And, rare for a nonstick pan, it is dishwasher safe. It’s a shame that … It’s safe to use metal utensils and steel wool on – we just don’t recommend it on the outside of the pan since you risk scratching the mirror finish. Still safe, just not as pretty. Chemical disclosure: free of Pfas, PTFE, PFOA Material: Fully-clad titanium and stainless steel layers with aluminum core

Size dimensions: 19.7in x 10.5in x 5.3in (with lid)

Weight: 4.6lbs with lid

Induction safe? Yes

Dishwasher safe? Yes Our Place Titanium Always Pan Pro from $179 $179 at Our Place $179 at Amazon

Best for the oven:

Caraway Enamel Cast Iron Skillet Caraway Enamel Cast Iron Skillet from $185 $185 at Caraway $185 at Amazon Photograph: Courtesy of Amazon $185 at Caraway $185 at Amazon What we loved: Lower-quality pans can dome, or warp, in the middle due to big changes in temperatures. But Caraway’s enamel cast iron kept an even, smooth surface with minimal cracking. – even though enamel is technically a glass coating that could be sensitive to sudden temperature changes. It had decent heat retention, which makes it a great dish to serve for company. Cornbread is a good option: in our test, the bread came out with even color and the same temperature throughout. We’re thinking of cobbler or pot pie for the next round of baking. As a lab that has long appreciated Le Creuset cookware, we found Caraway’s to have similar baking capabilities, plus a modern and colorful appeal with its sleek matte coating. It’s a shame that … This pan did not do very well on our stovetop tests with chicken, fish and eggs. Even with extra oil, many of those stuck to the pan. Chemical disclosure: Free of Pfas, PTFE, PFOA Material: Enameled cast iron

Size dimensions: 16.5in x 10.5in x 2in

Weight: 5.8lbs

Induction safe? Yes

Dishwasher safe? No Caraway Enamel Cast Iron Skillet from $185 $185 at Caraway $185 at Amazon

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Rachel Sherman/The Guardian

The best of the rest

Other non-toxic pans we tested

What else to know about non-toxic cookware

What is ‘toxic’ cookware?

“Back in ancient Greece, they would say the difference between medicine and toxicity is dose,” Schauer said. While nonstick coatings may be okay most of the time, it is how and how much we use them that makes them dangerous.

High heat can cause chemicals to leach into your food. “When you put coatings on, that’s what can’t take the heat,” she said, “and that’s when you have issues.” Cooking with metal utensils can also scrape off small particles that get into our system.

Acid in food reacts to aluminum in cookware when heated, causing the aluminum to leach into the food. This is why most aluminum cookware is made with nonstick coatings. But these coatings have been scrutinized for having “forever chemicals” such as Pfas, PFOA, BPA and PTFE.

What are forever chemicals and why are they dangerous?

PFOA, Pfas, BPA and PTFE are called “forever chemicals” because of the long time that it takes for them to break down in our bodies and the environment. They have been classified as possible carcinogens by the WHO and have been linked to cancers such as testicular, liver and breast cancers.

Pfas stands for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances. It’s a large group of synthetic chemicals that are resistant to heat, oil and water. That’s why they don’t break down easily.

PFOA is one specific type of Pfas. It’s historically been used to make nonstick coatings like Teflon.

PTFE is a polymer (a type of plastic) best known by the brand name Teflon. It’s what gives traditional nonstick pans their slick surface. PTFE itself is stable at normal cooking temperatures, but if overheated to temperatures higher than 650F (343C), toxic fumes can be released. These fumes, if inhaled, can cause a condition commonly called polymer fume fever or Teflon flu.

What are the safest materials?

View image in fullscreen Photograph: Rachel Sherman/The Guardian

If you want to avoid Pfas and PFOA entirely, the safest pans are cast iron, stainless steel, carbon steel and ceramic (true ceramic, not ceramic coatings). Each has its own pros and maintenance needs.

How safe is cast iron and enamel cast iron?

While even cast iron can leach iron, many people see this as a benefit for nutrition. Enamel cast iron does not react with food at any temperature and is therefore considered non-toxic as well. In older, cheaper pans, the enamel glaze has a higher risk of containing more heavy metals, so err on high-quality, modern enamel cookware and avoid anything without manufacturing labels.

How safe is stainless steel?

High-quality stainless steel (18/10 or 18/8 grades) is very safe. It could leach a tiny amount of nickel, but that is only an issue if you have a nickel allergy.

How safe is carbon steel?

Like cast iron, it’s generally safe. Carbon steel is made from iron and a small percentage of carbon, so it’s similar to cast iron, but lighter and smoother. No coatings – it just needs seasoning with oil to create a natural nonstick layer.

How safe is ceramic?

True ceramic, made from kiln-baked clay and glazed, is generally non-toxic. However, ceramic coatings can chip or wear down, exposing metal underneath that can potentially leaching into foods. Safety depends on the brand and quality of the glaze.

Some ceramic and nonstick coatings contain “trace” amounts of lead the way foods such as sweet potatoes and cinnamon do, making this definition too broad for our purposes. While we evaluated ceramic pans for our test, none of our award winners have this material – we found it was difficult to track when ceramic cookware began overheating.

How do I know if a pan is safe to use?

On brand websites, look for a page on chemical disclosure, usually listed with “California Safer Food Packaging and Cookware Act of 2021 (CA AB 1200),” the regulation that mandates disclosure. This is the place to begin.

Avoid pans disclosing PFOA, Pfas, BPA and PTFEs. Look at how each company tests the coatings too: is it a third party? Is the brand open about publishing findings?

Temperature safety is another thing to pay attention to. Many home cooks do not test pan temperature regularly, if at all. Directions state that pans with a 450F (232C) maximum temperature can be cooked over medium heat, but if you have a gas stove, medium heat might still be too high. During testing, we found that some of our ceramic pans heated over the maximum recommended temperature very quickly.

If you are truly worried about chemicals leaching into your food, invest in an infrared thermometer (we recommend Thermoworks) to make sure coated pans do not cross their temperature limit.

What else should I know before buying?

While sets are popular, sometimes mixing and matching may be the better option. Perhaps a cast-iron or carbon steel pan for your meat and fish dishes, a ceramic-coated pan for your eggs or other low temperature dishes, and the Titanium Always Pan Pro for everything else. Don’t limit yourself by visual appeal, research your cookware materials and figure out what works best for your lifestyle.

The Drexel Food Lab is a food product design and culinary innovation lab that applies culinary arts and science to improve the health of people, the planet and economies. It is a faculty-mentored, interdisciplinary food product design and culinary innovation research lab whose staff has written for various publications around the world.