Donald Trump approved a federal emergency declaration Saturday related to a sewer main break north of Washington DC that threatens to put a stink on the US’s 250th anniversary celebrations in the US capital this summer.

“The president’s action authorizes Fema to coordinate all disaster relief efforts to alleviate the hardship and suffering caused by the emergency on the local population and to provide appropriate assistance to save lives, to protect property, public health and safety, and to lessen the threat of catastrophe,” a release from the Federal Emergency Management Agency said.

Millions of gallons of raw, untreated sewage have been pouring into the Potomac River following a rupture in the 72in Potomac Interceptor pipe last month. The Washington Post said: “Raw sewage flowed toward the capital city in what is now one of the largest sewage spills in US history.”

Earlier this month, local utility company DC Water estimated that 243m gallons of wastewater had leaked from the 54-mile (87km) line before a temporary bypass was set up.

Saturday’s emergency declaration allows Fema to mobilize in support of cleanup and recovery efforts in Washington DC, and in surrounding areas of Maryland and Virginia. The sewage spill has prompted environmental concerns, recreational advisories and mounting questions on the maintenance of infrastructure.

On Wednesday, Washington mayor Muriel Bowser declared a local public emergency. Bowser also wrote to Trump asking him to declare a major disaster for Washington. The spill has led to dangerous levels of E coli bacteria in the Potomac, and the DC department of energy and environment recommends avoiding contact with the river.

Trump has blamed local and state officials for the spill and directed federal authorities to “protect” the Potomac, calling it an “ecological disaster”. But officials have been feuding over which agency or utility is responsible.

Jay Apperson, spokesperson for the Maryland department of the environment, told The Hill in an email that “even though the portion of the pipe that broke is in Maryland, DC Water owns and operates the Potomac Interceptor, and it is regulated and overseen by the federal government, specifically the US EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]”.

“Also, although the interceptor is in the State of Maryland, the break is more precisely within the C&O Canal National Historical Park, which is National Park Service property,” he added.

Trump wrote on his Truth Social network on Tuesday that Bowser, Maryland governor Wes Moore and Virginia governor Abigail Spanberger “must act, IMMEDIATELY” and said the federal government “can fix” the issue.

That came after Moore, a Democrat, blamed Trump for the spill.

“The President has his facts wrong – again. Since the last century, the federal government has been responsible for the Potomac Interceptor, which is the origin of the sewage leak. For the last four weeks, the Trump Administration has failed to act, shirking its responsibility and putting people’s health at risk,” said Ammar Moussa, a spokesperson for the governor.