Willie Colón, the pioneering trombonist, vocalist and composer, died on Saturday aged 75, his family has said.

With more than 30m albums sold, multiple platinum records and 11 combined Grammy and Latin Grammy nominations, Colón is among the most successful salsa artists of all time.

The cause of death was not disclosed.

The family said on Colón’s Facebook page: “It is with profound sadness that we announce the passing of our beloved husband, father, and renowned musician, Willie Colón. He passed away peacefully this morning surrounded by his beloved family.

“While we grieve his absence, we also rejoice in the timeless gift of his music and the cherished memories he created that will live on forever.

“Our family is deeply grateful for your prayers and support during this time of mourning. We kindly ask for privacy as we navigate our grief.”

Born in the Bronx to Puerto Rican parents, Colón recorded dozens of albums, including La Gran Fuga (The Big Break) in 1970 and El Juicio in 1972.

He signed with Fania Records, a label that promoted salsa music, aged 15. Two years later, in 1967, he released his first album, El Malo, which has sold more than 300,000 copies, according to his biography on the LA Philharmonic website.

Colón’s music combined elements of jazz, rock and salsa, incorporating the rhythms of traditional music from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Brazil and Africa.

Pietro Carlos, his longtime manager, wrote on Facebook: “Willie didn’t just change salsa.

“He expanded it, politicized it, clothed it in urban chronicles and took it to stages where it hadn’t been before. His trombone was the voice of the people.”

The performer’s list of genre-defining songs includes Ché Ché Colé and Aguanile, recorded with Héctor Lavoe on vocals.

His 1978 album Siembra, recorded with Rubén Blades, includes the hit Pedro Navaja and remains the biggest-selling salsa album of all time.

Fania Records said in a statement: “Today we bow our heads as the world mourns the loss of one of the greatest artists of our time – the incomparable Willie Colón: legendary trombonist, visionary composer, master arranger, emotive singer, bold producer, fearless director and tireless innovator.

“We are heartbroken by the passing of an icon whose sound transcended the dancefloor and defined an era. A pillar of Fania Records, Willie helped bring Latin music from the streets of New York to audiences around the world.

“His music declared identity, pride, resistance and joy. His music was not just heard; it was lived.”

Bruce McIntosh, VP of Craft Recordings’ Latin catalogue, said: “Willie was much more than an iconic artist; he was a true visionary that forged a new genre of Latin music that we all love today called salsa.

“His legacy is etched into the very soul of Latin culture. He will forever be ‘El Maestro’.”

In 2004, Colón received a lifetime achievement award from the Latin Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.

Billboard magazine named the musician as one of the 30 most influential Latin artists of all time in 2015.

He was inducted into the International Latin Music Hall of Fame in 2000 and the Latin Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2019.